once you hit me as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explain where
we'll be taking a look at someone the
more ambiguous and discussed movie
endings that have left audiences
debating their true meaning long after
the credits of role this time we're
going to be looking at one of the most
iconic films of the 90s David Fincher's
Fight Club adapted from a 1996 novel of
the same name Fight Club was released on
a 15th November in 1999 and due to some
questionable marketing ultimately
underperformed at the box office however
by the time the movie hit the relatively
new format of DVD word-of-mouth had
spread and it was a smash hit on the
home video market Fight Club began its
life as a cult film but has since gone
on to be remembered as a classic of its
time the film follows an insomniac
travelling automobile recalls
specialists played by Edward Norton and
if you haven't seen Fight Club why are
you watching this video go watch it
because spoilers the Ed Norton character
is unnamed the narrator or to simplify
proceedings we'll call him Jack as he
often quotes phrases such as I am Jack
smirking revenge referring to Jack as a
name of the everyman he meets a man
called Tyler Durden a charismatic soap
salesman played by Brad Pitt
Tyler takes Jack in after his apartment
explodes and the two begin to form a
bond that mostly becomes sealed by
fighting each other an act that slowly
draws crowds and creates their
underground Fight Club
Tyler heaps his nihilistic views on to
Jack chastising him for subscribing to
materialism and following the crowd
slowly but surely with Tyler as the
figurehead The Fight Club evolves beyond
men simply meeting up to test each
other's physical and mental limits into
a militant anti corporate organization
named Project Mayhem Jack becomes
unhappy with Tyler over the group
believing that it's taking things too
far until that famous scene when Jack
learns the truth answer me why do people
think that I'm you yes you do why would
anyone
you got it no do not say it because
we're the same person that's right we
are looking for a way to change your
life you cannot do this on your own all
the ways you wish you could be that's me
the central twist of Fight Club is what
really got people talking what really
drove those DVD sales and the glowing
reviews that didn't seem to affect the
box office
either way the idea that Tyler Durden
was in fact Jack and that Jack is
suffering from dissociated personalities
within his own head gives the story an
incredible new spin it begs for
rewatching noticing little details you
hadn't seen the first time a completely
new perspective placed over every single
frame the third central character in the
film Marla played by Helena Bonham
Carter first meets Jack a testicular
cancer support group meeting Jack and
Molly share a lot of similarities
outside of them both being imposters at
the same meeting and as she pops up more
in the movie she enters into a sexual
relationship with Tyler which makes
things a little awkward for Jack after
he realizes the truth of who and what
Tyler Durden really is I've come to
realize something
so concentrating on Jack and Tyler being
the same person an idea that in the
discussion of most movies would be
nothing more than a wild fan theory is
an actual and significant part of the
plot what are some of the clues very
early on in the film we see split-second
splices of Tyler in the frame an example
of subliminal messaging the Tyler
himself references later on in the movie
they're hints of the fractured
beginnings of jacks
Tyler delusion beginning to crack
through his mind
Tyler is Jack's wish fulfillment self a
man able to break past the consumerism
and [ __ ] of the dictated modern life
and lead his own path
something that Jack feels he is unable
to do as himself in the scene where Jack
confronts Tyler over a secret project
mayhem group the car crashes
in the scene you can see that Tyler was
driving yet when the car is turned over
in the wreckage
Tyler climbs out of the passenger side
and helps Jack out of the driver's seat
even in the opening scene of the film
where we begin at the end a clue is
dropped when Jack says this I know this
because Tyler knows this I know this
because Tyler knows this there it is
right in the opening scene once the
wheels are off when we reach the climax
of the film project mayhem are set to
blow up a number of buildings that house
credit card companies records with
Tyler's goal to erase global debt and
put everyone back on the same level Jack
tries to stop Tyler even knowing that
he's fighting himself he is unable to
break himself away from his own insanity
and their final confrontation Jack
realizes the only way to truly stop
Tyler is to kill him and the only way to
do that is to almost kill himself
I want you to really listen
my eyes are open
by shooting himself through the mouth
and seeing Tyler's brains blown out jack
is seemingly free of Tyler or is he at
one point he is able to make himself
realize that he is the one holding the
gun but he can't just shoot Tyler and
kill what is effectively a hallucination
his mind has regained some control but
Tyler is still there so in taking
Tyler's advice or his own advice
he hits bottom and puts the gun inside
his own mouth now the bullet goes
through Jack's cheek but through Tyler's
head which doesn't make much literal
sense but then it's not a very literal
situation to begin with in Jack's mind
it was symbolic and killing Tyler and
freeing himself of his second split
personality but is Tyler Durden truly
dead in a sense no as Jack is Tyler and
given the fact we never know Jack's name
and that the reward for project may have
members who dedicate themselves to the
causes to be given a name and seen as
the huge plan of destroying all the
buildings goes through at the end Jack
could very well end up becoming Tyler
Durden if only in name one of the wilder
theories out there on Fight Club is that
not only is Jack both himself and Tyler
Durden
but the jack is also Marla beyond the
similarities between the two characters
and then both attending a testicular
cancer support meeting in one scene
Marla takes a bunch of genes out of a
washer then proceeds to sell them an
actor could be seen if you believe the
theory that Jack is also Marla as Jack
rejecting his masculinity in that moment
I for one don't think this theory holds
too much water but it's fun to think
about and Jack's head is surely missing
enough connecting wires to allow such a
thing to happen the bottom line is
almost every moment between Jack and
Tyler can be accounted for as far as an
outside perspective goes as seen in
these moments when Jack is told the
truth by Tyler yet Marla shares some
physical interaction with other
characters however again Jack is
seemingly capable of imagining quite a
lot of extra details so it's not
completely outside of the realms of
possibility in this story there are
seemingly unlimited theories about Fight
Club based purely on that classic
twist in the third act as it's so wild
you could feasibly apply it to almost
anything especially in the film so rich
and dense with detail and layers many
people believe the bob for example the
character played by meatloaf is also a
figment of Jack's imagination or another
part of his own personality although
there is no house where Jack and Tyler
live for most of the film is there a
weight to these ideas or people simply
looking too hard for the most ardent of
fan theorists this movie is a feast so
have at it and let us know what you
think in the comments below I'll leave
with a recent comment from director
David Fincher about the film Fight Club
is about the most dangerous thing in the
world
ideas
[Music]
[Applause]